Add support for WARP (#211)
lightonai/pylate: docs/documentation/retrieval.md

)
```

---

## XTR Retrieval

[XTR](https://arxiv.org/abs/2304.01982) (conteXtual Token Retrieval, Lee et al. NeurIPS 2023) is a multi-vector retrieval approach that changes both how the model is trained and how documents are scored. PyLate exposes XTR retrieval through the **WARP** backend, which packages it as a fast end-to-end IVF index via the [`xtr-warp-rs`](https://github.com/pau-mensa/xtr-warp-rs) Rust engine ([Jha et al., SIGIR 2025](https://arxiv.org/abs/2501.17788)). For best results, pair WARP with a model trained on the XTR objective via `pylate.scores.XTRScores` — see [XTR Training](training.md#xtr-training) for the training side.

### How XTR scoring works

> The classic ColBERT scoring step pools the candidate documents returned by a first-stage index, fetches their full embeddings, and re-scores them with the full MaxSim. XTR instead **scores documents directly from the per-token-hit scores** themselves: for each query token, a document gets credit for the maximum score it received in that token's top-`k_token` list, summed across query tokens, with the **minimum retrieved score** imputed for query tokens that did not surface any of its tokens (matching the original XTR paper). WARP implements this scoring natively, with aggressive IVF-based pruning that skips work which would not change the final ranking.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The classic ColBERT scoring step pools the candidate documents returned by a first-stage index, fetches their full embeddings, and re-scores them with the full MaxSim. [XTR](https://arxiv.org/abs/2605.00646) instead **scores documents directly from the per-token-hit scores** themselves: for each query token, a document gets credit for the maximum score it received in that token's top-`k_token` list, summed across query tokens, with the **minimum retrieved score** imputed for query tokens that did not surface any of its tokens (matching the original XTR paper). In PyLate, you can select between using ColBERT (full MaxSim scoring) or XTR (min score imputation) simply by using `retrieve.ColBERT` or `retrieve.XTR`
WARP implements this scoring natively, with aggressive IVF-based pruning that skips work which would not change the final ranking.
```

Reviewer 2: > with aggressive IVF-based pruning that skips work which would not change the final ranking.

I think this implies a bit too much lossless pruning for what WARP's actually doing. It's still an approximation at the end of the day.

### WARP (end-to-end)

> WARP is faster than FastPLAID because it approximates more aggressively. It prunes the centroid space per query token and uses an error-aware merge to skip work that does not change the final ranking. Latency and memory footprint at retrieval time go down, and retrieval quality stays competitive on standard IR benchmarks. Use WARP when search latency or RAM is your bottleneck.

Reviewer: WARP is the equivalent of PLAID for XTR retrieval. XTR-WARP is faster than...

> WARP is faster than FastPLAID because it approximates more aggressively. It prunes the centroid space per query token and uses an error-aware merge to skip work that does not change the final ranking. Latency and memory footprint at retrieval time go down, and retrieval quality stays competitive on standard IR benchmarks. Use WARP when search latency or RAM is your bottleneck.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
WARP is the equivalent of PLAID for XTR retrieval and xtr-warp-rs is an implementation of WARP based on FastPLAID. xtr-warp-rs is faster than FastPLAID because it uses more approximations. Latency and memory footprint at retrieval time go down, and retrieval quality stays competitive on standard IR benchmarks. Use WARP when search latency or RAM is your bottleneck.
```

)
```

---

## WARP

PyLate also ships a WARP backend that wraps [`xtr-warp-rs`](https://github.com/pau-mensa/xtr-warp-rs), a Rust implementation of the [WARP engine (SIGIR 2025)](https://arxiv.org/abs/2501.17788).

WARP is faster than FastPLAID because it approximates more aggressively. It prunes the centroid space per query token and uses an error-aware merge to skip work that does not change the final ranking. Latency and memory footprint at retrieval time go down, and retrieval quality stays competitive on standard IR benchmarks. Use WARP when search latency or RAM is your bottleneck.

### Model compatibility

Unlike PLAID, WARP does not work equally well with every multi-vector model: its centroid-pruning approximations rely on a relatively flat token-score distribution, which standard ColBERT training does not always produce. When the model fits, WARP is both fast and accurate; when it does not, recall can drop noticeably.

> [Jha et al. (2026)](https://arxiv.org/abs/2605.00646) show that training with the [XTR](https://arxiv.org/abs/2304.01982) objective flattens the score distribution and recovers WARP's quality on top of any IVF-based engine. PyLate supports XTR training natively as a drop-in replacement for ColBERT's score function — see [XTR Training](training.md#xtr-training) for how to wire `scores.XTRScores` (or `scores.XTRKDScores` for distillation) into your loss.

Reviewer 2: > recovers WARP's quality on top of any IVF-based engine

this doesn't exactly type-check to me: WARP is an instance of an IVF-based engine. Should it read "recovers the model's quality...", "recovers the model's quality on any IVF-based engine", or "recovers WARP's quality."

    "PLAID compresses ColBERT token vectors via product quantization to deliver sub-200 ms latency on large corpora.",
    "WARP is a multi-vector retrieval engine that prunes the centroid space per token and uses an error-aware merge to cut per-query work.",
]

# 1. Load any ColBERT model. The same models that work with PLAID work here.
model = models.ColBERT(model_name_or_path="lightonai/GTE-ModernColBERT-v1")

# 2. Initialize the WARP index
index = indexes.WARP(
    index_folder="pylate-warp-index",
    index_name="my_documents",
    override=True,
)

# 3. Encode and add documents
documents_embeddings = model.encode(
    documents,
    batch_size=32,
    is_query=False,
    show_progress_bar=True,
)
index.add_documents(
    documents_ids=documents_ids,
    documents_embeddings=documents_embeddings,
)

# 4. Retrieve
retriever = retrieve.ColBERT(index=index)
queries_embeddings = model.encode(
    ["What is late interaction?", "How does WARP differ from PLAID?"],
    batch_size=32,
    is_query=True,
)
scores = retriever.retrieve(queries_embeddings=queries_embeddings, k=10)
print(scores)
```

### Tuning

> All search and indexing hyperparameters are flat keyword arguments on `indexes.WARP(...)`, the same constructor style as `indexes.PLAID`. `n_ivf_probe` shares its name and meaning with the PLAID parameter. The other WARP-specific search knobs (`bound`, `t_prime`, `max_candidates`, `centroid_score_threshold`) default to `None`, which lets `xtr-warp-rs` auto-tune them from the index. Leave them alone unless you have a reason. Indexing params (`nbits`, `kmeans_niters`, `max_points_per_centroid`, ...) follow the PLAID conventions.

Reviewer 2: I want to reiterate my worries about the `xtr-warp-rs` parameters being undertuned for retrieval effectiveness. If we default our constructor parameters to None and let it's autotune take over, I think users will see a disappointingly low top-line nDCG/Recall number and drop WARP, even if it is blazing fast. 

@pau-mensa would you object to a safer default hyperparams (just set in the pylate WARP constructor) of e.g. nprobe=32, t'=100k with a louder callout that this is a _conservative but still faster than FastPlaid_ config that users should tinker with?

Author: I have no problems with it and it actually goes with the PR's flavor of fitting WARP into the same interface the other indices expose.

However, as a practitioner and someone that runs this in production systems today I'd never trade the 5-10x performance gains that the auto-tuned parameters give you for the ~2% (relative) improvement on retrieval metrics that bumping up `nprobe` and `t_prime` offer.

Maybe the compromise here is to set these hyperparams (`nprobe=32`, `t_prime=100_000`) but give more clarity in the docs as to what the trade offs are? @NohTow @raphaelsty do you have an opinion here?

Reviewer: I really have no strong opinion
I said to @robro612 that I prefer to have slower defaults so the user never wonders "wow ok but are those results bad because of the index or my model?", but in the case of XTR, I can understand that the goal is speed so it would make sense as well. I am very fine with going with slower defaults and adding a lot of info in the documentation, but I can understand if you think default should be more aggressive as well

Author: Alright, added the defaults @robro612 mentioned and an extra explanation in the retrieval docs. You can check the diff [here](https://github.com/lightonai/pylate/compare/460c7509423c7d769b5d0fb6c96912ee07f961ac..0fd12f75692a4487e11c69e348ec0a5083aa9604)

I think this fits nicely with the PR's flavor! I will say though that having to explicitly set `nprobe` and `t_prime` to `None` in order to boost the latency (with the quality tradeoff) seems pretty unintuitive, but is difficult to improve it unless the way pylate interacts with indices change, out of scope right now
